hi I'm Steve Clemens and I have a
question why have American evangelicals
become Israel's strongest backers let's
get to the bottom
[Music]
line throughout the war in Gaza and for
decades before that American
evangelicals have been some of the most
powerful voices for Israel and that's
saying a lot 30% of Americans describe
themselves as evangelicals conservative
Christians are the backbone of the
Republican party's support for Israel
and they dve the national debates on
abortion on immigration on education and
even race they believe that God made a
promise to the Jewish people designating
Palestine as their Homeland and they see
the creation of Israel in 1948 as a
fulfillment of biblical prophecy this
idea known as Christian Zionism can be
traced back for centuries so with all
the weight that conservative Christians
have in the US how much of these ideas
are driving American policy on the
Middle East and is the catastrophic War
waged by Israel over the past few months
mon in Gaza sparking a debate among
Christian churches in the country today
we're talking with Jonathan katab
co-founder of the Palestinian Human
Rights group Al Hawk board member of
Bethlehem Bible College and author of
beyond the two-state solution Jonathan
thanks so much for joining us I have to
admit this terrain is one that I don't
often talk about which is you know the
religious dimensions of conflict and
National interest tell us what we should
know about Christian Zionism well
Christian Zionism is is an old phenomena
uh and there are different kinds of
Christian zionists but the broad uh
thread that connects them all together
is a uh a political position on Zionism
in Israel based on some interpretations
of
scripture uh some of them are really far
out uh some of them believe that it's
the duty of Christians to support
Israel uh because that helps the Jesus
come back again the second coming it's
tied into their interpretation of
prophecies and end times you may have
heard about the Left Behind series or
the late great planet Earth these are
very popular
sensationalized uh expressions of
Christian Zionism that says that the end
of the world is near uh the creation of
the state of Israel is a harbinger of
the second coming of Christ and that
somehow Christians are supposed to
support uh this uh state of Israel uh as
as part of God's plan uh for the world
now not all Christian zist believe that
what do what they do believe is that
somehow it's the duty of Christians
to support the in gathering of the
Jews uh and to support the state of
Israel they take one uh verse in
scripture in
Genesis where God says uh to Abraham I
will bless those who bless thee and
curse those who curse thee through your
seed will all the nations of the world
be blessed so people say we need the
blessing we want the blessing uh so we
want to support the state of Israel
because that's the way to obtain God's
blessing the problem of course is that
this is a totally false interpretation
of scripture because the New Testament
says that the seed of Israel is used in
the singular who is Christ it is through
Christ that all the nations of the world
are blessed and not through Netanyahu or
the state of Israel I find it
interesting because I think this is a a
certain strain of the Evangelical
movement that has that that talks about
the conflict that's unfolded today
almost in holy war terms which we
haven't seen with political power but
this does have political power yes this
is really a very fascinating thing uh
and it doesn't only apply to Christian
zionists uh the state of Israel and the
Zionist movement has actually sought the
support of well known anti-semites as
long as they are politically in their
corner like uh hungary's Orban for
example um like President Trump uh
people who are bigoted anti-semitic who
hate Jews but who are willing to support
the state of Israel are welcomed by
Netanyahu and his elk and John HEI is a
perfect example uh in his theology he
actually very
anti-semitic at one time he says God
doesn't even answer the prayers of Jews
uh but but the this uh strange political
wedding between anti-semites and the
Zionist movement is also available for
Christian
zionists you can you can hate Jews you
can think that they are uh you know God
is going to curse them uh very recently
I heard about a uh Pastor in a big mega
church uh we were trying to ask them to
pray for the children of Gaza and he
says no no no no I don't want to do that
I don't want us to create trouble
because you see I believe in the
prophecy all these Jews are going to
gather there and then with a big smirk
on his face says they're all going to
die because Armageddon they're all gonna
be destroyed except for those who accept
Jesus Christ as their savior so this guy
who really doesn't like Jews who thinks
they're all going going to be destroyed
is still going to politically support
Zionism in the state of Israel not
because he really loves Jews or cares
about them but because it fits in his
Twisted theology well I'm want to ask
you in a moment Jonathan about hamas's
ideology just to you know be fair and
talk about different corners of this
equation but um another puzzle piece in
this confusing for me anyway is that the
ambassador of Israel to United Nations
gilad um eron actually went to the
Cornerstone Church went to um Texas
where where John haggy is based and um
uh Christians United for Israel are are
are based and and he made the following
statement he says Hamas ideology is the
same as that of Isis Al-Qaeda and the
Ayatollah regime in Iran does it worry
you to see a leading Statesmen from
Israel serving in the United Nations
allied with uh John haggy and this uh
Christians United for
Israel well
uh let's be very clear I am not an
apologist for
Hamas uh their uh philosophy their
ideology is
islamist but it's a much more mild form
of islamist certainly not
Isis uh they certainly like the appeal
of religion and I think
one must realize that with the failure
of Arab nationalism throughout the
Middle East uh there is greater uh
interest in an
Islamic uh form of politics but Islam is
such a broad spectrum it's it's like
Christianity you can be a Christian
Marxist you can be a Christian uh Sufi
you can be a Christian Mystic you can be
a Christian liberal or a Christian
conservative or a Christian radical so
Islam is a very broad uh thing it's not
monolithic and frankly at least the
people that I know from Hamas are quite
mild quite moderate quite uh some of
them are progressive there are some
crazies of
course uh but but then you find that in
every religion and in every political
movement uh I I think the Hamas leaders
have made it clear that they are willing
to accept a sort of long-term Hood now
with Israel that they are willing to
work with uh the PLO and the fat and the
nationalists uh they are uh more
religious in their uh political
Doctrine but but they're not crazy
fundamentalists they certainly are not
uh like Isis and they have been very
protective actually of the tiny
Christian minority in Gaza throughout
the years a lot of the rise of Hamas was
because people were very disgruntled
with fat and the Palestinian Authority
who are very
corrupt and
inefficient at best and at worst they
were serving the occupation and
collaborating with it and sort of
controlling its people as
subcontractors for the Israeli
occupation so of course people would
reject that uh and and and would would
go to lean towards a more religious
outcome and and you have to understand
uh people in Palestine and throughout
the Middle East are
religious but it's a mild kind of
religion it's a deep faith that
ultimately God is in
control you see people living in
calamities and raising their hands up
and says God look what's happening to us
we look to you for salvation so there is
always going to be a religious component
uh to people's uh views on politics and
everything else the question is what
kind of religion is it a moderate or is
it an intolerant fanatical religion uh
and and my at least my own uh experience
with ham
that it's a rather moderate form of uh
Islam it's it's like almost like the
Muslim Brotherhood uh rather than like
Isis I'm not saying the Christian
Zionist group in America is all power
powerful but it does have power the the
US um Embassy in Israel did move from
Tel Aviv to Jerusalem in part because of
this movement so there is muscle there
and I'm interested in your study of this
group gr and to what degree they see
Palestine in in a future that may be
more just more fair to both sides
frankly well the Christian Zionist
movement doesn't at all deal with the
Palestinians uh for them the
Palestinians either non-existent or
they're the enemies of God because
they're the enemies of the state of
Israel uh I find that the appeal for
Christian Zionism is very Broad
but it's very thin it's not very deep
it's not as fundamental to their
identity as issues like abortion for
example or
homosexuality for them support for
Israel is like a default position that
they haven't thought much about because
they were never really asked or
questioned or challenged on it it's it's
it's a default position my my uh
interaction with Christian Zionist has
been that they are very shallow they
don't really know the facts for them
it's just a given that Israel because
they read about Israel in the Bible and
they equate the Israel of the Bible with
the modern day state of Israel they
equate the Palestinians with the
Philistines that were being frankly
ethnically cleansed uh by the Hebrew
tribes in the Old Testament they sort of
jump over 2,000 years of history and
they jump over most of the New Testament
so when you sit with them and to talk to
them and you quote the Bible to them uh
they are very liable to change their
positions but you have to talk to them
in biblical terms you have to quote
scripture to them you can't quote to
them international law what do they care
you can't quote to them the dangers of
World War I they say bring it on that's
the end times that's the second coming
that's wonderful you have to talk to
them about Christ's love Christ's
compassion uh Christ being the Prince of
Peace uh Christ being open to everybody
uh to Salvation for God so loved the
world not just the Jewish tribe that he
gave his only begotten son so whoever
believes in him shall not perish but
have everlasting life right when you
talk in that language to many Christian
zionists they say h we never thought
about that maybe you're right maybe
there is room for us to talk and to
discuss uh the problem is that most
people who who oppose Christian
Zionism uh don't use that language
instead they say you know you're crazy
you you uh we can't live our lives we
can't run our politics based on what you
say because it's destructive and they
say Okay destructive it is this is what
we believe this is what the Bible
teaches uh God said it I believe it that
settles it right what is your sense
Jonathan of how much this may affect
President Biden's view of the situation
you know Biden is not a Christian
Zionist he is a Catholic Christian who
is a believer in Zionism but we should
not merge those two together but how do
you feel Joe Biden is influenced by this
Conservative Christian
framing I think less so than for example
somebody like Michael Pence or Pompeo
from the old Administration they were
evangelicals and they were Christian
zionists uh I think Biden is more of a
politician uh I don't think his
Christian faith really is involved too
much in in in his politics he is a
Catholic as you uh mentioned and the
pope has been very clear about what
uh the Bible what Christians uh really
need to do about uh the current crisis
in Gaza uh so I'm not I don't think uh
uh Biden is himself a Christian zionists
you find more Christian Zionist among
white evang
angical uh who tend to be more
Republican uh than Democratic so
Christian Zionism is a phenomena more
closely allied with the Republican
rightwing uh politicians uh but but
there are people who are manipulative
these are politicians they don't really
care they don't really believe that's
not what motivates them rather it's in
interests one of the reminders to for
many Americans and many around the world
that there are Palestinian Christians
was a horrible incident in which a
mother and daughter um were shot by um
Israeli snipers while they were seeking
refuge in a church uh in Gaza would love
to hear about Palestinian Christians and
their view of this their differences
with the American Christian Community if
there are I mean I'd love to kind of see
where they are are on the map how
important are they in this equation
right now which is which is horrible but
they are there you're one of them well
Palestinian Christians have always been
an integral part of the Palestinian
national
movement uh from the days of George
habash to the days of
uh George Antonius even before that one
of the creators of the pan Arab
nationalist movement mement uh so so
Christians have always been part of the
Palestinian nationalist movement both
because of their commitment as
Palestinians but also because of their
uh belief in separation of church and
States we
say the Homeland belongs to everybody
but my religion belongs to God it's
between me and God what will it take uh
with your work and others to elevate the
notion that nonviolent movements
non-violent protest and resistance may
be a better answer while we're in the
you know horrors of War right now I
think what it takes is a few victories
uh Palestinians generally are not a very
militant people we have very militant
vocabulary we talk uh Blood and Guts and
power and and right rles but actually
most of the Palestinian political
movement from the 30s to this day has
been
boycotts uh appeals to the United
Nations
protests
organizing
negotiations Alternative forms hunger
strikes for prisoners most of our
activism has been nonviolent but it has
not used a nonviolent
rhetoric we have used a very violent
rhetoric armed struggle the gun will
speak uh no voice shall be raised above
the voice of the gun uh but but in in in
actual practice we haven't been uh very
violent in our struggle with Zionism we
have been largely nonviolent but we
haven't used the rhetoric the language
of nonviolence I mean until the BDS
movement which sort of in an organized
ized fashion triy to use nonviolence but
we've had the great March of return in
Gaza we have almost daily activities of
nonviolence in the West Bank protests
strikes uh hunger strikes fasting
raising slogans raising the flag even
getting shot for raising the flag uh
working on human rights
documentation uh we have been re very
active in nonviolence but we haven't
usually used the language of nonviolence
we we have used the language of armed
struggle uh sometimes very bloody
violent we will make the ground burn
under the feet of the occupiers very
violent language but but our activities
have been largely nonviolent what does
your gut tell you about where this
conflict is
going
well see two things happened on October
7th one of them was military the attacks
of Hamas were first military they
breached the wall they attacked soldiers
they attacked military install
installations they took over a number of
army
bases uh they killed about 300 soldiers
and captured many that was a military
operation nobody talks about
it they also attacked civilians and took
civilians hostages that was wrong that
was a war crime in many cases taking
hostages civilian hostages was was
illegal under international law
everybody concentrates on that portion
of what happened in October 7 uh rather
than the military aspect
and and I think many Palestinians were
fascinated with the military aspects
here comes a group that actually
breached the wall we tried non-violently
to approach the wall and the snipers
killed 62 of us in one day 62 unarmed
Palestinians walking towards the wall
were each killed by snipers in one day
uh so that uh people uh were attracted
Ed to the
military aspects of armed struggle which
Hamas Illustrated that even under the
very difficult circumstances of Siege uh
they were able to do something uh
militarily so in that sense it it really
helped uh shift the balance of power
which was so totally in favor of Israel
it it it created a little bit of a uh I
wouldn't say parity but a little bit it
Shrunk the gap between Palestinians and
Israelis on the other hand it really
increased the fears and the traumas of
Israelis uh and so therefore their
reaction was just
massive uh genocidal I mean they they
really went all out to try and recreate
the deterrent
but they will never be able to succeed
in that in in that aspect they will
never be able to restore the deterrence
restore the element of fear that's not
going to happen well we'll have to leave
it there thank you so much for joining
us Palestinian human rights lawyer
Jonathan katab co-founder of the
Palestinian Human Rights group Al Hawk
really appreciate your
cander thank you very much so what's the
bottom line Evangelical Christians are
Major Force in societies around the
world but the truth is they've helped
supplant functioning multi-ethnic
multifaith communities around the world
with sectarian divisions and religion
infused intolerance in Israel the Jewish
people have support of many evangelicals
because of the role Jews play in the Old
Testament of the Bible they sort of see
the Jewish people as part of their own
story and conservative Christianity
brings their political strength to
Israel's cause particularly today in
this war on Gaza there's just no doubt
that religion is a driver on both sides
of the Palestine Israel issue and all
political issues but the aspects of
Tolerance and empathy that are part of
all religions are getting drowned out by
sectarianism and hate the belief that
one religion will ultimately Prevail
above the others that's dangerous and it
makes it much harder to have discussions
on how to bring Justice and Better Lives
to both Palestine and Israel and that's
the bottom
[Music]
line